[DPE-6460] Add documentation for TLS (#43)
canonical/charmed-etcd-operator: docs/tls/enable-tls.md

# Enable encryption with TLS

Transport Layer Security (TLS) plays a crucial role in securing database communications.  Just as it protects web traffic, TLS encrypts the data transmitted between database clients and servers, preventing unauthorized access and ensuring confidentiality.

> Typically, enabling TLS internally within a highly available database or between a highly available database and client/server applications requires a high level of expertise. This has all been abstracted in Charmed etcd so that configuring TLS requires minimal effort on your end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I would remove this line; it feels more suited for an article or marketing piece since it does not add any precise technical information.

> etcd provides a secure transport layer for client-server and peer-to-peer communication. The etcd operator charm provides a simple way to enable TLS encryption for both client-to-server and peer-to-peer communication:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
etcd provides a secure transport layer for client-server and peer-to-peer communication. The etcd operator charm provides a simple way to enable TLS encryption for both:
```

- Client-to-server: the etcd client can verify the server identity and provide transport security

etcd also supports mutual TLS authentication, which provides an additional layer of security by requiring clients to present a certificate to the server for authentication. The server then checks whether a trusted CA signed the certificate and decide whether to serve the request.

## Enabling Encryption in Transit
Charmed etcd provides the option of using different CA certificates for client-server and peer-to-peer communication. This allows you to have different levels of trust for the two types of communication. You can also use the same CA certificate for both types of communication.

To enable encryption in transit between etcd members, all you need to do is integrate with a TLS provider such as [Self-Signed Certificates charm](https://charmhub.io/self-signed-certificates) or [Vault](https://charmhub.io/vault) to generate the required certificates and keys.

You can enable peer-to-peer encryption alone, client-to-server encryption alone, or both at the same time.

> > **[Self-signed certificates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-signed_certificate) are not recommended for a production environment.**  
> Check [this guide](/t/11664) for an overview of the TLS certificates charms available. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **[Self-signed certificates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-signed_certificate) are not recommended for a production environment.**  
> Check [this guide](https://charmhub.io/topics/security-with-x-509-certificates) for an overview of the TLS certificates charms available. 
```

```shell

> juju deploy self-signed-certificates --channel edge

Reviewer: Does this have to be deployed in the `edge` channel?

Author: For now, yes. We use the v4 lib which is currently only supported in the `edge` channel.

Reviewer: I would add a note there for some context, since the assumption is usually to deploy from the default channel (and is what the self-signed-certificates documentation does in their tutorial)

Maybe something like:
```shell
juju deploy self-signed-certificates --channel edge

```
> etcd uses`v4` of the [`tls-certificates` library](https://charmhub.io/tls-certificates-interface/libraries/tls_certificates). This version is currently only supported in the `edge` channel of the self-signed-certificates charm.

Author: I added the comment. Thank you @a-velasco!

charmed-etcd/0*              active    idle   1        10.73.32.122
charmed-etcd/1               active    idle   2        10.73.32.131
charmed-etcd/2               active    idle   3        10.73.32.193
self-signed-certificates/0*  active    idle   0        10.73.32.179

Machine  State    Address       Inst id        Base          AZ  Message
0        started  10.73.32.179  juju-5620b5-0  ubuntu@22.04      Running
1        started  10.73.32.122  juju-5620b5-1  ubuntu@24.04      Running
2        started  10.73.32.131  juju-5620b5-2  ubuntu@24.04      Running
3        started  10.73.32.193  juju-5620b5-3  ubuntu@24.04      Running

Integration provider     Requirer                 Interface   Type  Message
charmed-etcd:etcd-peers  charmed-etcd:etcd-peers  etcd_peers  peer
charmed-etcd:restart     charmed-etcd:restart     rolling_op  peer
```

Once the `self-signed-certificates` charm is active, integrate it to the `charmed-etcd` application on the `peer-certificates` endpoint. This will generate the required certificates and keys for peer-to-peer communication.

```shell
juju integrate self-signed-certificates:certificates charmed-etcd:peer-certificates
```

> To check that etcd is using the certificates generated by the `self-signed-certificates` charm, run the following command, you can replace the endpoint with the IP address corresponding to the unit you choose to run the command on. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check that etcd is using the certificates generated by the `self-signed-certificates` charm, run the `etcdctl` command shown below. You can replace the endpoint with the IP address corresponding to the unit you choose to run the command in. 
```

> The command below uses the `etcdctl` command to list the members of the etcd cluster. If you do not have the `etcdctl` command installed on your local machine, you can install it from the [etcd install page](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.5/install/).

```shell
etcdctl member list --endpoints http://10.73.32.122:2379 -w table
+------------------+---------+---------------+---------------------------+--------------------------+------------+
|        ID        | STATUS  |     NAME      |        PEER ADDRS         |       CLIENT ADDRS       | IS LEARNER |
+------------------+---------+---------------+---------------------------+--------------------------+------------+
| 68327020b9432fc8 | started | charmed-etcd2 | https://10.73.32.193:2380 | http://10.73.32.193:2379 |      false |
| c5aec105e79a433b | started | charmed-etcd1 | https://10.73.32.131:2380 | http://10.73.32.131:2379 |      false |
| c74cb15a5aeade42 | started | charmed-etcd0 | https://10.73.32.122:2380 | http://10.73.32.122:2379 |      false |
+------------------+---------+---------------+---------------------------+--------------------------+------------+
```

> You can see that the etcd is running with the peer addresses using `https` and the client addresses using `http`. This indicates that the peer-to-peer communication is encrypted using the certificates generated by the `self-signed-certificates` charm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see that etcd is running with the peer addresses using `https` and the client addresses using `http`. This indicates that the peer-to-peer communication is encrypted using the certificates generated by the `self-signed-certificates` charm.
```

> ## Enabling Client-to-Server Encryption and Authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Enabling client-to-server encryption and authentication
```

To enable client-to-server encryption and authentication, you need to generate the required certificates and keys for the clients. You can use the same `self-signed-certificates` charm to generate the certificates and keys for the clients.

Just like with peer-to-peer communication, integrate the `self-signed-certificates` charm to the `charmed-etcd` application but this time on the `client-certificates` endpoint. 

> > This tutorial is using the same `self-signed-certificates` charm to generate the certificates and keys for the clients. You can also use a different charm to generate the certificates and keys for the clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This guide is using the same `self-signed-certificates` charm to generate the certificates and keys for the clients. You can also use a different charm to generate the certificates and keys for the clients.
```

+------------------+---------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+
|        ID        | STATUS  |     NAME      |        PEER ADDRS         |       CLIENT ADDRS        | IS LEARNER |
+------------------+---------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+
| 68327020b9432fc8 | started | charmed-etcd2 | https://10.73.32.193:2380 | https://10.73.32.193:2379 |      false |
| c5aec105e79a433b | started | charmed-etcd1 | https://10.73.32.131:2380 | https://10.73.32.131:2379 |      false |
| c74cb15a5aeade42 | started | charmed-etcd0 | https://10.73.32.122:2380 | https://10.73.32.122:2379 |      false |
+------------------+---------+---------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+------------+
```

You can now successfully connect to the server using the `https` endpoint and provide the CA certificate, client certificate, and key to verify the server certificate and authenticate the client. You can also see that `etcd` is running with the client addresses using `https`. This indicates that the client-to-server communication is encrypted.

> ## Enabling Peer-to-Peer, Client-to-Server, and Mutual TLS Authentication At Once

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Enable peer-to-peer, client-to-server, and mutual TLS authentication at once
```

To enable peer-to-peer, client-to-server, and mutual TLS authentication at once, you can integrate the `charmed-etcd` application with the TLS certificates provider charm on both the `peer-certificates` and `client-certificates` endpoints at the same time.

```shell
juju integrate self-signed-certificates:certificates charmed-etcd:peer-certificates && juju integrate self-signed-certificates:certificates charmed-etcd:client-certificates
```

> ## Enabling Encryption at Deployment Time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Enable encryption at deployment time
```
